---
title: Hello!
description: A short welcome message for user context!
image: hello.png
---

### Hello! 

Welcome to the vramework blog!

The goal is of the blog is for me to share as much as I can about some design decisions I have taken whilst working on some of my projects/ideas. Once those are open for testing I'll be providing a lot more examples!

Since you are already here, let me share why vramework exists.

### Vramework Design Decisions Info

Vramework design decisions were mostly out of the following situations:

1) During the covid 2021 pandemic I started working on a project in an area with barely an internet, so it had to be easy to run entirely offline. But I wanted it to follow functionless from the start since it made it easier to throw in functionality and onboard developers.

2) The previous project I co-wrote / maintained ([deepstream.io](https://deepstream.io/)) has a concept of RPCs. This effectively allowed any client (whether frontend or backend) to register to become a provider. We deployed the same functions via both HTTP and RPC by putting a thin wrapper around the logic.

3) The projects I currently work on usually have a bunch of third party services we interact with (email, database, salesforce, google docs, JWT  management, etc). I found that having a simple dependency injection with the collection of services smoothens things out. This was also heavily inspired by the large refactor I have done earlier from  deepstream.io to V5.

4) Typescript! I have refactored my projects a zillion times (mostly due to changing requirements and partially because I can) and I have types EVERYWHERE to stop me from running into odd bugs.

5) A sprinkle of magic / autogenerated files because automation (sometimes!) makes life that much easier

You can take a deep dive into the decisions [here](/docs)