---
title: "Announcing Vramework 0.6: Websockets and Scheduled Tasks are here!
description: Explore the latest features in Vramework 0.6, including Typed Streams/Websocket support, scheduled tasks, and loads of compile time improvements!
---

# Announcing Vramework 0.6: Websockets, Scheduled Tasks and CLI improvments

It's been a a little over a month since our last release, and this release is just as juicy!

<!-- truncate -->

Before diving into the new features, let's briefly reintroduce Vramework. With the new changes it makes sense to step out from node.js HTTP and expand into the bigger ecosystem we hope to step in. 

## Vramework (Re)(Re)Introduction

Vramework is a lightweight, TypeScript-powered framework that allows developers to build their backend applications via a Function first approach, using pure typescript and interface API's to normalize different runtimes, and instead relying predominately on a build stage compiler ontop of Typescript to pull out all the information needed.

What vramework isn't is another server. The runtime itself is minimal, and depends on underlying servers (such as uWS, express, fastify, happi, nextJS) to do the actual HTTP / Websocket / Stream lifting. Which means we can write our code once and decide how to deploy it later.

At the core of Vramework is the APIFunction. This function interacts with services created at runtime start-up (and can also create those that are unique to a each request). We then link these functions to HTTP, websockets or cron jobs to allow them to be run in specific ways, with permission guards, auth checks and documentation baked in.

The benefits to an approach like this is:

###  No server commitments

If you want to switch between uWS / express / ws / that's up to you. 

:::note
Setting up the server with the correct *cors* or having a multipart file upload would need to be done via the runtime you select. Normally I would recommend a seperate service for these type of API's, since if your deploying functionless it's more likely you'll be using S3 or Azure Storage for this anyways. 
:::

### No runtime commiment

If you decide to switch between bun or deno.js any channges will be  scoped to your codebases use of APIs and other packages, which would be a great way to test out differences without it being a major refactor. (Note: Bun support and deno is officially not here yet)

:::note
Bun and Deno start repos are a WIP for official support. Bun is unofficially supported and deno requires a little bit more ❤️ due to some of the differences in their core APIs.
:::

### No deployment commitments

This is the most important component for most early adopters. You can run your code in docker on kuberneters, but also deploy a function or two on lambda/azure functions, and have a unified experience for testing / developing.

This means when developing locally you don't need to install and run virtual environments to simulate the cloud. You can do so for testing, but for day to day development you can run everything locally via a normal server (including end to end tests) and then deploy to a functionless server once your happy.


### Typescript Typescript Typescript

Ultimately vramework came out of a desire to have a fully typed codebase without having to the typing. A bit ironic a framework was born out of the desire to be lazy, but I have been using this approach for years and it just works.

So in version 0.5 we introduced **@vramework/cli**, a compile time cli that inspects your typescript project and extracts out all the useful types, allowing us to do some pretty useful things, like generating OpenAPI documentation automatically from function types (and some other meta data), generating schemas to validate routes and create a typed fetch client that works as an SDK.

Combined with something like `kyself-codegen` this now means we can extract our types from an SQL database, augment them in the backend if needed, and have it update the types for our frontend APIs.

What this means, is renaming or dropping a column in your database would automatically cause an error on the backend and frontend that uses that it via a websocket or http call. No special classes or decorators needed. It's sort of like magic, except it's just squeezing as much information out of Typescript as possible.

## New Features

And now, ontop the fun stuff!

### Scheduled Tasks

You can now register any `APIFunctionSessionless<void, void>` as a scheduled tasks, along side the cron interval you want to run it at.

Following the usual vramework mindset, the core library is just the invoker, and we use the package `@vramework/schedule` in order to schedule the tasks themselves.

You can read more about this [here](../docs/24-scheduled-tasks/10-scheduled-task.md)

```typescript
import { addScheduledTask } from '@vramework/core/scheduler'

export const myScheduledTask: APIFunctionSessionless<void, void> = async (services, _, session) => {
    // do something
}

addScheduledTask({
    name: 'myScheduledTask',
    schedule: '*/1 * * * *',
    func: myScheduledTask,
})
```

### Channels

We just added support for channels, which is something I'm pretty passionate about, given I started my career in realtime and am a core team member of the realtime opensource server [deepstream.io](https://deepstream.io).

I'll likely be writing a blog on some of the challenges on deepstreams design (and the parts I also carried over), but the core aspect really comes down to scalability. As a thought experiment trying to run a data-sync/pubsub server via serverless didn't tie in very well with deepstream given it was primarily design to run as a server.

Other inspiration came from a combination of uWS, an extremely fast server with built in pubsub capabilities,  AWS Serverless Websockets, which doesn't look at all appealing to code in but makes alot of sense once deployed and [AsyncAPI](https://www.asyncapi.com/), a way way to document API's and automatically generate bidirectional client sdks in multiple languages.

The goal is to create a middle ground to support all three (and other typescript/javascript runtimes like WS / Bun / Deno / other servers going forward) which would allow us to design our code for serverless, even if we don't desire the hassle of deploying it that way.

A websocket is called a channel in vramework, inspired by [AsyncAPI](https://www.asyncapi.com/). I'm not entirely sure how it will map out to work with other bi-directional specs, but hopefully the same concept can be used with TCP / MQTT with the right adaptors.

You can read about how it works in depth [here](../docs/23-channels/00-channel-intro.md).

#### New channel functions

```typescript
// Gets call on connect
// You can do setup code here and send information out
export const onConnect: ChannelConnection<'hello!'> = async (services, channel) => {
    services.logger.info('Connected to event channel')
    channel.send('hello!')
}

// Gets call on disconnect
// You can do teardown code here, but can no longer send anything
export const onDisconnect: ChannelDisconnection = async (services, channel) => {
    services.logger.info('Disconnected from event channel')
}

// This is called when a message is recieved (we'll associate them routes later, since we might we to reuse some paths across different channels)
export const authenticate: ChannelMessage<{ token: string }, { authResult: boolean }> = async (services, channel, data) => {
    const authResult = data.token === 'valid'
    if (authResult) {
        channel.setSession({ userId: 'Bob' })
    }
    channel.send({ authResult })
}
```

#### Subscription Service

The channel messages also get access to the subscription service, which allows us to implement pubsub channels.

:::info
My favourite implementation of this is via uWS [here](https://github.com/uNetworking/uWebSockets.js/blob/master/examples/Broadcast.js) since it's all built in. Bun uses uWS under the hood so does the [same thing](https://bun.sh/guides/websocket/pubsub). WS requires us to implement the logic [ourselves](https://github.com/websockets/ws?tab=readme-ov-file#server-broadcast) and the AWSServerless one does it [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/apigateway/latest/developerguide/websocket-api-chat-app.html). There are likely better blogs than downloading cloudformation code.. but it is the official documentation 😅
:::

The general idea is that you can **subscribe** to any topic and **publish** to them as well, which provides a pub/sub mechansim out of the box. From my experience that combined with an authenticated session and presence tends to be a large part of what is desired from pubsub cloud offerings. It's usually the hosting and scalability part that gets pretty complicated when dealing with long lived connections.

Under the hood (or not, if you decide to provide your own implementation) the runtimes (uWS and WS so far in this release) provide the optimial solution. If using uWS then we rely on it to broadcast, if ws we provide our own simple logic (as per their docs) and in serverless land we use their async APIs.

```typescript
export const subscribe: ChannelMessage<{ name: string }> = async (services, channel, data) => {
  // Subscribe the current channel to subscriptions
  await channel.subscriptions.subscribe(data.name, channel.channelId)
}

export const unsubscribe: ChannelMessage<{ name: string }> = async (services, channel, data) => {
  // UnSubscribe the current channel to subscriptions
  await channel.subscriptions.unsubscribe(data.name, channel.channelId)
}

export const emitMessage: ChannelMessage<{ name: string }, { timestamp: string } | { message: string }> = async (services, channel, data) => {
  // Forward the current channel to subscriptions 
  await channel.subscriptions.broadcast(data.name, channel.channelId, { timestamp: new Date().toISOString() })
  await channel.broadcast({ message: `broadcasted from ${channel.channelId}` })
}
```

I'll release another post sometime about why switching from websocket servers to serverless (even as a architecture thought experiment) can provide you the same benefits as moving away from sticky sessions in HTTP land, but for now the same logic from [this blog](https://dev.to/rahulvijayvergiya/sticky-sessions-benefits-and-drawbacks-68n#:~:text=Drawbacks%20of%20Sticky%20Sessions&text=Scalability%20Issues%3A%20Sticky%20sessions%20can,the%20scalability%20of%20the%20application.) on HTTP should provide most of the information!


### Compiler Improvements

In version 0.6 we took this further, now allowing types to be defined within the actual functions themselves, without having to create custom ones.

For example:

```typescript
const updateBirthday: APIFunction<{ userId: string, birthday: number }, { success: boolean }> = async (services, book) => {
  ...
}
```

This will create two types dynamically during compile time:

```typescript
export type UpdateBirthdayInput = { userId: string, birthday: number }
export type UpdateBirthdayOutput = { success: boolean }
```

:::note
The usage of primitive types like boolean, string and number are not currently supported.
:::

## Features Dropped

As is the case with how most projects start, one aims for the moon and realises that just reaching sub-orbit is a more realistic goal.

As a result, we decided to drop the things we know will be deprecated in the near future. 

### CommonJS

I mean, getting esm and cjs to work together.. was an absolute waste of time in hindsight 😅. Newer libraries are only ESM (which makes sense) and having to drop them for older/heavier libraries felt like a bit of a step in the wrong direction.

That, and I pretty much wasted a week of my life with all the typescript errors. No more. The websocket and fetch clients are still cjs compatible for frontend us, but the backend will need to use `esm`, which has had native support since Node16.

Also, bun and deno support should be coming along in the next release, which was another strong factor.

### NextJS

Theres still a debate around support for nextJS in conversations. I'm curious to see how well it plays with the approach being taken with caching and their async server rendering. It also appears they may be doing some more magic on the vercel hosting which vramework **may** not help with. The current approach used currently is for applications that are standalone or dockerized, which works well for server side rendering without having your frontend app become your backend app.

We dropped nextJS 14 support because of their breaking change with accessing headers/cookies. Figured upgrading to 15 is easier than supporting the small amount of current usecases.

Also dropped nextJS pages. I'm a bit saddened by this part, I actually prefered that approach in terms of seperation. However it allows us to keep the codebase smaller / cleaner and debugging nextJS pages didn't feel like a good use for our current hours.

### Embedded Functions

Part of the work on the CLI has removed the functionality to allow embedded functions, meaning the following won't work:

```typescript
addRoute({
  method: 'get',
  route: '/todo/:todoId',
  func: async (services, data: JustTodoId) => {
    // return todo
  },
  auth: false,
})
```

This can be added in the future again, but it raises alot more edge conditions that slowed down testing and the release date.
